entry_number: "26"
artist: Anne-F Jacques
meta_description: A knife is cutting through air, relentlessly.
companion_text: |
  <p>A knife is cutting through air, relentlessly. However, it cuts very slowly, by degrees and in circles; it’s a wooden knife, not very sharp, like a butter knife but with teeth. The structure upon which this knife is attached has a light bulb resting on it, a light bulb with a rather complex metallic grid inside, vibrating softly with every degree of the knife’s turns.
  </p>
  <p>Then there is a strip of paper or a piece of thin cardboard, suspended; three toothpicks are leaning on and pushing this cardboard but they are not strong enough, the cardboard barely undulates. Sometimes a toothpick will fall down and the cardboard keeps humming quietly, unperturbed.
  </p>
  <p>Two motors, small, round, nervous, on a wood plank; a sandpaper cone on each of them, with minuscule weight but just enough to slightly destabilize their travel. The motors whistle while turning, they seem engineered to operate smoothly, seemlessly, indefinitely – and yet with this excrescence on their backs they limp, heave, and stumble over non existent obstacles.
  </p>
  <p>A ship, that in fact is a bedside lamp, with a 15 watt light bulb inside the deck. A motor on the deck of the ship, leaning against the ropes; electricity scarce or insufficient, the motor barely turns, occasionally plucking a rope as if by mistake. Sound is coming from far away, from the other side of the room, emanating through the gyproc of the wall maybe, or through the potted plant.
  </p>
  <p>– AFJ
  </p>
pub_date: 2017-10-10
sound_url: http://feeds.soundcloud.com/stream/248850792-lateral-addition-4-situations.mp3
copyright_info: [ ]
text_author: ""
release_group: [ ]
tags: [ ]
title: 4 Situations Involving Objects, Electricity, Movement and Amplification
id: 0b73af42-d600-4fec-af44-e0ace27caf33
