entry_number: "6"
artist: Ursula Nistrup
meta_description: >
  Audio from Whistling while walking through Charamarende Castle, 2009 and On the Moods of Sound (1
  and 2), 2010
companion_text: |
  <p>Audio from <i><a class="ext" href="http://nistrup.com/whistling.html" target="_blank">Whistling while walking through Charamarende Castle, 2009</a></i> and <i><a class="ext" href="http://nistrup.com/moodofsounds.html" target="_blank">On the Moods of Sound (1 and 2), 2010</a></i>
  </p>
  <p><i>Sound is contingent on material yet it has no material component of its own.  In some of your recent work, you focus on the material that shapes acoustic environments (such as the wood in <i><a class="ext" href="http://nistrup.com/12tonewoodhills.html" target="_blank">Tonewood Hills</a></i> and the awning in <i><a class="ext" href="http://nistrup.com/12eave.html" target="_blank">Eve</a></i>).  By emphasizing the physical reality of sound, the non-ethereal, material aspect of aural perception is accentuated.  It is my belief that part of what distinguishes the culture surrounding sound practices from the wider field of visual culture is the tendency to look inward and deal with the formal aspects of sound while neglecting the outward, external elements that also inform sonic experience.  I would be interested in you addressing this particular concern within your work.</i>
  </p>
  <p>Sound has no obvious materiality but it does still have materiality.
  </p>
  <p>As with the media of light, one of the unique and fascinating characteristics of sound is that it can be present and absent simultaneously.
  </p>
  <p>I am very interested in the relationship between the various elements that shape a situation, a space, an experience. You might say that light makes it possible to see walls or that walls enable one to experience and catch light. With sound resonating in a room, a room’s tone is created by distances, material, heights of ceilings and the thickness of walls.
  </p>
  <p>A point I find interesting in Steen Eiler Rasmussen’s text <i>Hearing Architecture</i> is that buildings are built to make certain ways of singing or talking possible or impossible and that certain ways of singing are developed for specific buildings. This relationship between sound and architecture, in particular, has been crucial for me.
  </p>
  <p>The relationship is also something I am currently investigating as part of a work/study in South India. In several of the temples here, there are pillars constructed specifically to create a unique room tone. These are referred to as musical pillars. In one particular temple, two pillars were removed by the British at some point in history. I am interested in somehow imagining and re-creating the tones that the two missing pillars may have created.
  </p>
  <p>From a conceptual point of view, the project relates to a series of soundboards made of resonating tonewood that I have made. The soundboards do not produce their own sound. They exist as suggestions for alternative <i>non-standardized resonances</i> (see <a class="ext" href="http://nistrup.com/three_nonstandardized_resonances.html" target="_blank"><i>Three Non-standardized Resonances</i></a>). The space between what can be heard, what can be audibly remembered and audibly imagined is central to my practice. And here the materiality and form of the objects become objects in their own right but also abstract tools with which to begin the thought process into the remembered and the imagined.
  </p>
  <p>– UN
  </p>
pub_date: 2013-07-07
sound_url: http://feeds.soundcloud.com/stream/100080011-lateral-addition-material.mp3
copyright_info: [ ]
release_group: [ ]
tags: [ ]
title: Material
id: 89948b41-ce69-4a8a-85ce-5cf826421dbc
