entry_number: "35"
artist: 'The Pitch '
meta_description: A framework of understanding
companion_text: |
  <p>The pitch is a playing field. Four players
  </p>
  <p>trying to pitch something, an idea, a sound.
  </p>
  <p>A tone of definite frequency.
  </p>
  <p>The Pitch is a co-sharing of musical space,
  </p>
  <p>of certain parameters, limitations and an instrumental
  </p>
  <p>awkwardness collectively carried into brightness.
  </p>
  <p>Working out simple ideas to see how far
  </p>
  <p>we can take them. How long we can play them.
  </p>
  <p>How often we can handle them.
  </p>
  <p>Modes of interaction, rules of engagement,
  </p>
  <p>aesthetic agreements, instrumental limitations.
  </p>
  <p>Reducing material until we’ve reached the core.
  </p>
  <p>Initiative, shared intuition, collective composition, instrumentation.
  </p>
  <p>Bass harmonics doubling the clarinet,
  </p>
  <p>vibraphone rounding out the harmona,
  </p>
  <p>sine tones combining instrumental forces.
  </p>
  <p>The harmona is missing pitches. Playing such an archaic,
  </p>
  <p>flawed instrument is a deliberate limitation.
  </p>
  <p>We discovered how to sound together. What to play
  </p>
  <p>and when to play it. Every small decision having
  </p>
  <p>huge consequences for the outcome of the whole.
  </p>
  <p>It seems like we’ve just gotten started. / “It’s actually getting quite good now.”
  </p>
  <p>—- —- —- —-
  </p>
  <p>The Pitch was founded in Berlin in the year 2009 by BB, KN, MJO and MT with the aim to create a common musical language to be used to play structured improvisations; together and with guests. The peculiar instrumentation was a deliberate attempt to create an ensemble which would rather focus on pitch constellations and the creation of a group sound and group strategies than on the development of individual improvisational languages or elaborate extended instrumental techniques played at the same time.
  </p>
  <p>They have an upcoming concert with legendary Viennese ensemble Polwechsel, for which a new piece has been collectively composed by the two ensembles combining materials and strategies in real time.
  </p>
  <p><a href="http://www.ballhausost.de/produktionen/polwechsel-the-pitch/">www.ballhausost.de/produktionen/polwechsel-the-pitch/</a>
  </p>
  <p>More sounds and information about The Pitch:
  </p>
  <p><a href="http://www.thepitch.tk/">www.thepitch.tk</a>
  </p>
  <p>—- —- —- —-
  </p>
  <p><em>Subatomic Motion (i7 / sine tones / tape)</em>
  </p>
  <p>The Pitch<br>Boris Baltschun – pump organ, function generators<br>Koen Nutters – upright bass<br>Morten J Olsen – vibraphone<br>Michael Thieke – clarinet
  </p>
  <p>Composed by The Pitch<br>Recorded and transferred by Morten J Olsen<br>Recorded in Berlin, April 2017
  </p>
  <p>Text by Koen Nutters
  </p>
  <p>*The first phrase of the writing was constructed late one night<br>with the assistance of Martijn Tellinga.
  </p>
pub_date: 2017-05-09
sound_url: http://feeds.soundcloud.com/stream/321768836-lateral-addition-subatomic-motion.mp3
copyright_info: [ ]
text_author: Koen Nutters
release_group:
  - Spring 2017
tags: [ ]
title: Subatomic Motion (i7 / sine tones / tape)
id: 1234559f-9985-4570-a4e1-c9ce738d8414
