entry_number: "22"
artist: Jason Kahn
meta_description: 'Voice, drums, recordings here and there.  Composed July – August, 2015'
companion_text: |
  <p>Voice, drums, recordings here and there.
  </p>
  <p>Composed July – August, 2015
  </p>
  <p>I started this piece walking down by the Limmat on a cold, windy day. Whitecaps chopped the water and I was a bit out of breath from fighting the wind and trying to keep warm by moving at a brisk pace. Under the Hardbrücke the deep resonance there swallowed me up. A long rowboat chained to the concrete pilings of the bridge whipped to and fro in the strong current. I headed up the stairs to my studio.
  </p>
  <p><em>Schulhaussingen</em> happens twice a year at my kids’ school. I usually go and I also usually record this. I like the fact that all the parents are there to hear their kids sing. People in my neighborhood come from all over the world. It’s cool to see so many different nationalities, hear all the different languages. The kids sing these really goofy songs but it’s a nice vibe all the same. And afterward they all mingle in the entrance to the auditorium. Their laughter and shouts fill the space like a fierce storm. I like to disappear in those voices.
  </p>
  <p>Most days I go to play the drums at a musicians collective not far from my house. I bring my cymbals, set up and start to play. Nothing in particular. Sometimes I have the Sony along and record whatever it is I’m playing. I guess I’m always recording something. The material just piles up. I like to go back and pick stuff randomly. It’s amazing sometimes what I’ve recorded. Maybe in that moment it just sounded OK, nothing special. But with time, <em>wow, </em><em>where did that come from? I don’t remember that!</em>
  </p>
  <p>I’m not sure when I started singing. I guess when I was a kid. And then in some bands later on. But those recordings never saw the light of day. And now a few years ago I started again. It’s not really something I practice at technically, like I did the drums. More just when I get a hankering to do it. It’s just a feeling. Sometimes I get the chance to do this in front of an audience, either alone or with others. I like sitting there, vulnerable. There’s nothing between me and the listener. No microphone. Just a guy sitting there on a chair making sounds with his mouth.
  </p>
  <p>I’m not sure how this piece came together. I knew how I wanted to start it, down by the Limmat. And the end had to be this lullaby which I sang to nobody in particular. But the rest was just this hole. Finding that recording of the kids singing had to be one station between the beginning and end. And then too Alice learning to talk. I think she was two years old then. Now she talks non-stop, so it was funny hearing her wrestle with <em>wildebeest</em> and <em>giraffe</em>. Time flies, as they say. The title is taken from the lyrics to <em>Hooked on a Feeling</em>. I prefer the B.J. Thomas interpretation of this song to Blue Swede’s commercially more successful version.
  </p>
  <p>Why did I put the drums in there? Hard to say. Maybe as a <em>musical interlude</em>?
  </p>
  <p>The beginning is me reading a text I wrote about a man standing at an intersection in downtown Los Angeles, jingling coins in a tin cup. This happened around fifteen years ago. The city has long since cleaned up this part of town. They got coffee shops and cute restaurants there now, so I don’t think the man would be able to stand at that intersection anymore. Or, if he did, certainly not for as long as I saw him standing there. I sometimes wonder where that man is now.
  </p>
  <p>– JK
  </p>
pub_date: 2015-09-03
sound_url: http://feeds.soundcloud.com/stream/222186904-lateral-addition-feeling.mp3
copyright_info: [ ]
release_group: [ ]
tags: [ ]
title: I Can’t Stop This Feeling
id: b4e428e3-1253-4c73-997b-bae630bc1e2b
