entry_number: "41"
artist: Benjamin Bennett
meta_description: ????
companion_text: |
  <p>IMPORTANT: Do not click the "LISTEN" button that you see above.
  </p>
  <p>The only way to experience this piece is to never listen to any of the audio. Listening to the audio, or any part of it, will make you unable to experience the piece. You will not only be not experiencing the piece while listening to the audio, but the possibility of experiencing the piece in the future or the past will also be destroyed. Even if you go a long time without listening to the audio, but then you decide to listen to it sometime in the future, you will not have experienced the piece even in the past. Do not think that you can listen to only a tiny snippet of the audio and still experience the piece.
  </p>
  <p>There is a WAV file presented here that contains 4 hours of <em>potential</em> audio content, which would only become <em>actual</em> audio content if you streamed it, or downloaded and played it. This data is not meant to be turned into sound. Turning it into sound destroys your experience of the piece. If for some reason you need assurance that there is content in this file, you may download the file and note that it takes up 2.3 gigs of disc space. You could even open it in a WAV editor and <em>look</em> at the waveform, but do not play any part of it. I strongly discourage this however, because it would increase the temptation to listen to it, and furthermore, it would prevent you from <em>optimally </em>experiencing the piece, which is described below.
  </p>
  <p>The optimal way to experience this piece is to spend as little time thinking about it as you are capable of. Anytime you notice yourself thinking about this piece, you can simply redirect your thoughts toward something else. If you talk about this piece, you won't be experiencing it fully while doing so, because talking about it requires thinking about it. Even reading this text is causing you to think about the piece, so in order to begin experiencing the piece fully, you will need to click the CLOSE button in the upper-right corner, and do something else to take your mind off this. You could listen to one of the other pieces presented on this website, or better yet, close the browser tab and look at something else on the Internet.
  </p>
  <p>As long as you never listen to any of the audio file that is presented here, you will experience the piece. If you take the additional step of making an earnest effort to avoid thinking about this piece, you will experience it optimally. Rather than rereading any portion of this text, the best thing to do now is click the "CLOSE" button and allow this information to begin slipping away from your memory.
  </p>
  <p>- BB
  </p>
pub_date: 2018-05-19
sound_url: http://feeds.soundcloud.com/stream/446370171-lateral-addition-do-not-listen.mp3
release_group:
  - Spring 2018
title: Do Not Listen
id: 91b130ba-20c2-421e-91a1-57e01351547a
